Troubleshooting Audio and Video Quality with
Webex Control Hub
Outline
I. Introduction
II. Audio and Video Fundamentals
a. Impairments
b. TCP Versus UDP
III. Audio in Webex Meetings
IV. Video in Webex Meetings
a. Video Quality Artifacts
b. Factors That Influence Video Quality
V. Control Hub Audio and Video Troubleshooting Analytics
VI. Use Cases and Troubleshooting Scenarios
a. Garbled Voice and Line stripe Artifacts in Video
b. Tips to Troubleshoot Network Issues in Home networks
Introduction
At the core of Webex meetings is the audio and video communication that occurs between
participants. While this communication is usually a great experience, on rare occasions the audio
and/or video quality can be degraded. This degradation can be caused by issues anywhere along
the audio or video path, including laptop resource issues, network issues, or work-from-home
bandwidth issues. These issues can lead to a poor meeting experience for attendees.
With a focus on end user environments, this document is targeted at Webex administrators,
partners, and other Control Hub users who have a working knowledge of voice and video in the
context of Webex meetings. Various features and functions for audio and video troubleshooting
are available in Webex and knowing how and when to apply these improves the resolution time
for these issues.
Divided into four main sections, this white paper teaches voice and video fundamental concepts
and then applies these to troubleshooting real world use cases using the Webex administrative
platform, Control Hub. The first section is Audio and Video Fundamentals. In this section,
foundational elements covering topics, such as the digitization of audio and video, Quality of
Service (QoS) impairments, and UDP versus TCP transport are discussed. Understanding these
topics is critical for establishing a proper foundation in how audio and video communication
streams work in today’s networks.
In the next two sections, Audio in Webex Meetings and Video in Webex Meetings, an
introductory look is taken at how audio and video work in general, but also in the context of
Webex meetings. After completing these sections, you will have the proper foundation for
learning how to effectively troubleshoot audio and video quality issues in Webex meetings.
The section, Control Hub Audio and Video Troubleshooting Analytics, guides you through the
various functions and capabilities in Control Hub. At the conclusion of this section, you should
feel comfortable moving through the various Control Hub screens and knowing where to go to
get more detailed information at the meeting and individual user level.
The last section, Use Cases and Troubleshooting Scenarios, shows you real world examples of
audio and video quality issues. With each example, you are guided step by step through the
various screens in Control Hub that lead to the successful resolution or definitive next steps to be
taken for that particular problem.
By the end of this document, you should feel confident handling audio and video troubleshooting
issues from your users or your customers. This document can also serve as a handy reference for
future consultation.
Note: This white paper is focused exclusively on troubleshooting Webex Meetings audio and video
quality issues, not meeting join or other issues that may occur prior to the establishment of the audio
and video connections. Quality issues typically deal with audio and video streams that present with
impairments of some sort that in turn affect the viewing or hearing of the media.
Audio and Video Fundamentals
In the not-too-distant past, telephony and data networks were separate. Data traffic traveled over
common Local Area Network (LAN) and Wide Area Network (WAN) technologies like ethernet
and MPLS using routers and switches. Meanwhile, telephony traffic was carried over FXO/FXS
connections and T1/E1 circuits using Private Branch eXchanges (PBXs) and telephony carrier
switches connected to the Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN). Starting around the turn
of the century, the Internet Protocol (IP) telephony revolution, however, completely changed this
paradigm.
IP Telephony merged voice and video onto the existing data network infrastructure. IP at this
point was becoming the ubiquitous data protocol of choice and so it made sense to use this for
transporting telephony information as well. The analog waveforms of traditional voice and video
were digitized and transferred across data networks in packets. The ability to take sound and
light, which is passed using analog waveforms in the real world, and turn that into a digital
representation of 0s and 1s is the foundation that allows the transmission of voice and video over
today’s packet networks.
Figure 1: Digitizing an Analog Signal
In Figure 1, a high-level overview of the digitization of an analog signal is shown. In this case
the source would be speech from a phone, but it just as easily could be your voice going into a
headset on an IP phone, a teleconferencing system, or even your PC. No matter what you are
talking into, this same process must occur. The analog speech coming out of your mouth must be
digitized to go over an IP network.
Note: Both audio and video must be digitized. While Figure 1 is representative of audio, the light
captured in video is also an analog waveform initially. This must also be captured by the camera on
your PC, video conferencing system, etc. and digitized before it is transmitted.
Both audio and video can be digitized or encoded using a number of different algorithms. These
algorithms are usually referred to as codecs, which is short for coder-decoder. Depending on the
codec being used, the audio and video stream that is encoded will typically vary in quality,
bandwidth, and amount of compression. Naturally, the best audio and video quality is desired,
but this usually requires more bandwidth and often more processing power as well. Therefore,
balancing several factors are necessary when audio and video codecs are selected by a device.
For audio specifically, the digitized stream produced by a codec is divided into segments and
packetized. The amount of audio information stuffed into each packet is determined by the
packetization period of the codec. This is also referred to as the packetization time. For example,
if a codec has a packetization period of 20ms, then 20ms worth of the audio conversation is
placed into a packet and sent. Then 20ms later, another packet is sent with the next 20ms of
information for that conversation. What this means from a troubleshooting perspective is that for
each audio packet you lose, the packetization period determines how much of the conversation is
lost. Losing one packet is rarely a problem but groups of consecutive packets are much more
noticeable.
Webex Meetings supports multiple video and audio codecs to be compatible with many different
endpoints. Webex negotiates with each endpoint or system connected to it to ensure ideal codec
selection. If a codec match is not possible then codecs can be converted or transcoded to allow
for interoperability. Transcoding can occur at the endpoint locations or elsewhere in the network,
including the Webex cloud in some cases.
Note: With Webex Meetings, the audio and video codecs are selected automatically, so end users are
rarely ever aware of the codec that was chosen or if transcoding is occurring. For audio connections,
Webex Meetings prefers the Opus codec. For video streams, Webex typically uses H.264 and more
recently, AV1.
Impairments
The convergence of voice and video traffic with traditional data traffic, like web and email, has
posed some challenges. One of the biggest has been that voice and video are real-time traffic.
This means that packets of voice and video must arrive at their destination quickly, with little
delay. While it may be acceptable for an email to take a few seconds or even minutes to make it
to its recipient or for a web page to take a few seconds to load, no one is ok with seconds of
delay in their voice and video communications.
There are three main factors that impact the quality of an audio or video call. These factors
are packet loss, latency, and jitter. As shown in Figure 2, packet loss is simply losing one or
more packets within a stream of packets. In this example, a Voice over IP (VoIP) packet is
lost going from the Webex client to the Webex server. Loss can occur for a number of reasons in
a network but most commonly it is caused by congestion or resource contention in the network
or on the endpoints. This leads to routers, switches, or the endpoints themselves dropping or
delaying packets. In other cases, packets encounter such a high delay that they are received too
late to be played out. These packets will also be counted as lost.
Figure 2: Packet Loss Example
Latency is the one way delay between when a packet is sent from one device and received
on the other. Latency is part of Round Trip Time (RTT), which is the time it takes for a packet
to be sent and for a response to be received. Figure 3 illustrates delay for a VoIP packet.
Figure 3: Latency Example
Jitter is a little more complicated than loss or latency. Jitter refers to the variance in the
latency between packets. For example, if two packets arrive 5ms apart and then the next packet
arrives 100ms later, the difference in the interarrival times or the jitter between the 3 packets is
95ms. Figure 4 provides a graphical example of jitter. You can think about jitter as the difference
in sizes between the two arrows (representing time) between the VoIP packets.
Figure 4: Jitter Example
Note: Impairments can occur anywhere along the path of the audio or video stream. While Control
Hub will usually show that an audio or video stream has been affected by packet loss, jitter, or delay, it
is usually difficult to pinpoint the exact location. When possible, it is recommended to start at the
endpoint and then work towards the Webex Cloud to isolate the issue.
Effectively handling the real-time nature of voice and video communications over IP networks
requires prioritization of these packets throughout the network infrastructure. This is commonly
referred to as QoS or Quality of Service. In addition to prioritization, QoS also focuses on
handling impairments that may cause the loss or delay of the voice and video packets.
Because of the real-time nature of voice and video communications, QoS is critical to ensuring
optimal quality. While there are a number of mechanisms that Webex can employ to compensate
for issues related to QoS, it is still recommended that packet loss, jitter, and delay be kept to a
minimum whenever possible.
Note: Control Hub Diagnostics highlights potential problems with packet loss and delay by coloring
voice and video streams as Good, Fair, or Poor. It is important to understand that just because Control
Hub Diagnostics flags part of a conversation as Fair or Poor, it does not necessarily mean that the
user had a bad experience. Voice and video compensation mechanisms and algorithms in combination
with other factors can mitigate the impact of loss and delay to the point where it is not noticeable by
the user.
TCP Versus UDP
In the world of IP, one of two transport layer protocols is typically used by an application. These
two options are the Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) and the User Datagram Protocol
(UDP) as shown in Figure 5. The purpose of these transport layer protocols is to provide end-to-
end delivery of IP packets.
Figure 5: Common VoIP Protocol Stack
Both TCP and UDP as shown in Figure 5 commonly use the Real Time Transport protocol
(RTP) to carry payloads from an audio or video codec. Designed specifically for streaming
media, RTP was constructed to help detect issues, such as jitter, packet loss, and out of order
packets.
TCP and UDP take two completely different approaches in providing for the end-to-end delivery
of IP packets. TCP takes a connection-oriented approach. Before any IP data packets are sent,
each side of the TCP transaction agrees to a session using a handshake. Then, TCP guarantees
that every IP packet makes it to the other side by using sequence numbers, acknowledgements,
and retransmissions when required. This makes TCP “slower” than UDP but ensures that all data
transmitted is received reliably.
On the other hand, UDP handles delivery in a connectionless manner. It is not necessary to
establish a session at all with UDP and IP packets can be sent immediately. UDP also does not
guarantee a packet’s arrival at the destination because it does not retransmit packets that are lost.
While UDP may initially sound like it is not useful in its functions, for applications involving
real-time data, like voice and video, UDP is critical.
The reason that UDP is used when transporting voice and video codec payloads, is that it is
lightweight and retransmitting lost data is not necessary. If an audio packet is lost during a
conversation occurring using VoIP, by the time the origination is notified that a packet has been
lost and it is resent, it is too late. That part of the conversation has already been played out at the
other end. In most cases, real-time audio and video sessions do not have time to resend lost or
even late packets. This is why UDP is recommended, and almost always used, for the audio and
video traffic.
On occasion, UDP is not used for audio and video IP packets. This is most often caused by UDP
ports 9000 and 5004 being blocked by a firewall or similar device. When a Webex client is
unable to communicate with the Webex cloud using UDP, it will attempt to use TCP as a
fallback mechanism. However, for the reasons mentioned previously, TCP is not ideal, and audio
and video quality may be degraded more severely as compared to UDP if impairments are
encountered.
With Control Hub the usage of either UDP or TCP for each user is shown. In Figure 6, you can
see a screenshot of the Webex Meeting Participant Details that can found by looking at a specific
meeting after clicking on Troubleshooting from the selections on the left side of the screen.
Circled in red in Figure 6 are the audio and video transport layer protocols being used for the
audio and video media. In this case, it is UDP for both. You should also note that below this
information are the specific audio and video codecs being transported by UDP.
Figure 6: Screenshot of Control Hub Participant Details Highlighting the Transport Layer
Protocol Being Used by a Participant
TIP: UDP offers the best performance for audio and video media streams and is the preferred option
from a Webex perspective. Devices performing firewall or NAT functions may restrict UDP traffic.
When this occurs, Webex will fall back to TCP as the transport protocol, but this can result in reduced
audio and video quality when impairments are encountered compared to UDP.
Audio in Webex Meetings
Audio is an important part of the meeting experience. Therefore, audio quality is critical for
ensuring a productive and successful meeting. A number of factors can impact a participant’s
audio quality, including their join method and connection type, codec selection, endpoint device,
and the participant’s surrounding environment. In this section, you will learn more about these
factors and how they can impact audio quality.
Webex offers different join methods for connecting the audio path to a user. Depending on
licensed options, the user can select the option they want to use when they join the Webex
conference and can even change their selection during the meeting, if desired. Each of the join
methods will utilize either VoIP or the PSTN for connecting the user to Webex. Table 2
overviews the Webex methods for joining a conference.
Webex Join Method Connection Type
Device Audio – Utilize the speaker and microphone and the Internet connection VoIP
for the device joining the meeting for audio.
Call Back – Allows the participant to enter a phone number for the Webex PSTN
service to call them at.
Call In – Participant calls in to Webex from a phone and can connect to the PSTN
conference.
Table 2: Overview of Webex Meeting Join Methods
When Call Back or Call In are used to join a Webex meeting, the connection between the
participant’s device and Webex occurs through a third party PSTN provider in most cases. This
provider often uses VoIP internally but there is little to no visibility into this PSTN provider’s
network and the audio connection that is traversing it. Naturally, this makes any audio quality
issues that occur for Call back or Call In a little more difficult to troubleshoot.
For example, let’s take the following scenario shown in Figure 7. Two participants, David and
Arun, join a Webex meeting. Arun joins using Device Audio and David prefers a call back to his
desk phone.
Figure 7: Webex Meeting Showing a Call Back Participant and Device Audio Participant
In Control Hub you can view this meeting and naturally David and Arun are shown as the
participants. With the Audio tab selected in Figure 8, you will notice that David is listed twice as
a participant though.
Figure 8: Webex Control Hub View of a Meeting with a Call Back Participant and Device Audio
Participant
The participant David in Figure 8 joined via the Call back method. This is why he is listed twice
as a participant. The first listing is the audio path between David and Webex using Call Back as
notated by the phone icon beside his name. The second listing is the IP connection between the
device David is using and Webex. This connection is used for management and device
communications that can optionally enable other services like Video or screen sharing. If video
is enabled for a PSTN user, it will flow over the device’s Internet connection. Clicking on the
Call Back connection for the participant David shows more details about the PSTN connection as
detailed in Figure 9.
Figure 9: Control Hub Audio Quality Details for a Call Back Participant
As you can see in Figure 9, the troubleshooting information available for this Call Back join
method using a PSTN provider is quite limited. You can get a general sense of the audio quality
being received by Webex from the PSTN connection through the Mean Opinion Score or MOS.
However, the MOS value provides no details about what may be causing a low score.
The other meeting participant for the conference in Figure 7 is Arun and he joined using Device
Audio as his meeting join method. In this case, a VoIP stream is created between Arun’s device
and Webex. A negotiation takes place using the SIP protocol where a number of different
parameters are determined, including the audio codec. Once an audio codec has been agreed
upon, a bidirectional stream of packets that handles the incoming and outgoing audio for Arun is
constructed. Because of this direct negotiation and connection to Webex, Control Hub offers
more insight into the audio stream. In Figure 10, you can view the audio details for Arun.
Figure 10: Control Hub Audio Quality Details for a Device Audio Participant Using VoIP
As mentioned earlier in this document, Webex supports various audio codecs so that it can
effectively support just any type of device. However, the preferred codec of Webex is Opus and
you will often see this listed as the audio connection codec when troubleshooting issues in
Control Hub. The Opus codec is a wideband codec optimized for audio in meeting environments
while still being highly resilient to impairments, like packet loss. More information on the Opus
codec can be found at https://opus-codec.org
Opus and just about all other audio codecs are able to utilize algorithms that are either run on
dedicated Digital Signal Processors (DSPs) or CPU resources to deal with impairments, like
packet loss, delay, and jitter. In fact, some of these algorithms are even specified and built into
the codecs themselves. These algorithms can “fill-in” for missing or late VoIP packets. The
algorithms can be quite simple where just silence is played out to more complicated schemes that
interpolate and conceal for missing audio samples. The amount of compensation for loss packets
that can be achieved with these types of algorithms is impressive and gives audio streams the
ability to deal with packet loss in a manner that is usually unnoticed by the meeting participant.
TIP: In Control Hub, any audio quality issue detected is highlighted for transparency, but these issues
often go unnoticed by the end user, unless the issue is extreme or happens in a short time interval. As
mentioned in this section, algorithms and other methods are able to compensate for most impairments
that impact a VoIP stream. Exceptions often occur when a burst of errors occur over a short time
frame. For example, losing 100 VoIP packets over the course of a 1 hour call is not noticeable but
losing that many over the course of a few seconds is much more impacting to the participant.
NOTE: Video streams are unable to use the same algorithms and mechanisms to the same extent as
audio streams when it comes to handling packet loss and other issues. Therefore, meeting participants
will sometimes notice problems with their video and not their audio, depending on the severity of the
impairment that is being encountered. Video compensation for packet loss and other impairments is
discussed in detail in the upcoming section, “Factors That Influence Video Quality”.
While having more visibility to the audio stream in Control Hub is a decided advantage when
participants use Device Audio for a VoIP connection, the device’s audio speaker and microphone
along with the device’s surrounding environment can sometimes be a disadvantage. PCs, laptops,
tablets, and so on are not necessarily optimized for VoIP. The quality of the speakers and
microphones can be poor and usually they just act as a speakerphone of sorts. Additionally, these
devices can have resource constraints as the CPU and memory must be shared with other
applications. This can result in audio packets not being processed in a timely manner, which can
cause poor audio quality.
The environment where these devices are located can also be a problem. Often, the background
can be noisy and microphones on these devices are designed to be omnidirectional to pick up all
surrounding sounds. This can add additional noise to the audio path, which negatively affects the
audio quality. For these reasons, participants sometimes choose the Call Back or Call in Webex
join method. This enables them to use a dedicated phone device optimized for human speech that
usually allows for a headset or handset to be used as well to cut down on background noise.
However, with the appropriate equipment and environment, VoIP audio is superior to PSTN
audio. Even with some background noise present Webex implements specialized background
noise removal algorithms that have excellent performance in most cases. Additionally, VoIP
audio utilizes wideband codecs instead of the narrowband codecs used by PSTN audio.
Wideband codecs are of much higher quality and fidelity than narrowband codecs.
In most cases, the decision to use Device Audio, Call Back, or Call In is the choice of the
participant and they pick the method that is best for them and their situation. At the same time, it
is important to understand the advantages and disadvantages of these join methods, especially
when it comes to resolving issues with them in Control Hub.
TIP: Having participants mute themselves when they are not talking is more important than is often
realized. Poor audio quality (and even other issues like meeting echo) can sometimes be related to end
devices and their external environment. Muting resolves these issues in a simple manner. The option to
Mute is available to all participants and should be heavily encouraged, especially on meetings with
large numbers of participants.
Video in Webex Meetings
The number of participants who turn on video in virtual meetings has increased dramatically in
the recent years. Participants feel more intimate and involved as video enables them to get
connected at a human level and naturally convey their thoughts and feelings through facial
expressions. Video also allows participants to visualize the impact of their words and
conversation. For example, it empowers teachers to get insights into whether the remote student
in virtual learning classrooms is paying attention or needs more help to understand the concept
being taught.
Video quality plays a critical role in the overall satisfaction of an end user’s Webex meeting
experience. It is essential for Webex administrators to quickly analyze video quality issues
reported by users and take swift action to resolve them. Often, media quality issues don’t get
reported and hence it is highly recommended to proactively monitor Webex meeting analytics to
determine trends that would impact end users. Having a solid foundation of what is video, how it
works, common artifacts observed in a meeting, and factors that influence video quality will
prepare administrators to isolate the source of the quality issue quickly and engage the right
person to address the issue.
Video is a sequence of images played at a specific rate. The images are captured by the video
camera in the end user’s device (e.g., computer, smartphone, or video endpoint) and is made
available to the video encoder as raw video frames. The encoder uses a codec such as H.264 or
AV1 to convert raw video frames into IP video streams that are then transmitted to the Webex
cloud. The encoder can also use H.264 Scalable Video Coding (SVC) method to transmit the
same video in different video resolution formats. This enables Webex Cloud to minimize the
need to use transcoders in order to send the video stream of correct resolution based on the
meeting client needs and capabilities.
The meeting client application or the endpoint requests one or more video streams from Webex
cloud depending on the meeting layout selected by the end user. The Webex cloud determines
the active speaker and sends the requested number of participant video streams to the meeting
client in different video resolutions as shown in Figure 11. (for example, high resolution for main
video showing the active speaker, standard resolution for videos shown in participant panel and
low resolution for video thumbnails).
Figure 11: Video Streams in a Webex Meeting
The IP video streams used for video conferencing consists of two primary frame types:
1. I-Frame – Intra frame. This frame is larger in size and contains information about all the
pixels within a video frame.
2. P-Frame – Prediction frame. This frame is much smaller than the I-Frame and contains
information only about pixel changes since the last I-frame. It is generated by using the I-
Frame as the reference frame and is sent more frequently as shown in Figure 12.
Figure 12: Video Frame Types in a Conference Call
Video resolution and frame rate are two key parameters that define the video quality at the source
device. Video resolution specifies the number of pixels in the horizontal direction (width) by the
number of pixels in the vertical direction (height) captured in each video frame. The higher the
video resolution, the better the video quality and higher the bandwidth requirements.
Frame rate specifies the number of video frames per second. Higher frame rates are particularly
useful when there is frequent motion in the given scene. Typically, the primary video stream in a
Webex meeting that contains the participant’s face is sent at a higher frame rate whereas the
secondary video stream used for content sharing is sent at lower frame rates. Table 3 shows the
video resolution, frame rate, and bandwidth for video stream types used in Webex meetings. The
aggregate bandwidth utilization for a Webex meetings depends on a variety of factors, such as
meeting layout, type of client device, and the number of screens used at the client device. The
Bandwidth Provisioning and Capacity Planning section of Preferred Architecture for Cisco Webex
Hybrid Services, Cisco Validated Design document provides typical and maximum video
bandwidth requirements for Webex endpoints and applications.
Video stream type Video resolutions Frame Rate Video bandwidth
(fps) (bits per second)
High-definition primary video (720p) 1280x720 30 900 Kbps to 1.8 Mbps
High quality primary video (360p) 640x360 30 320 Kbps to 512 Kbps
Standard quality primary video (180p) 320x180 30 128 Kbps to 256 Kbps
Content sharing (motion and video) 1280x720 30 0.25 Mbps
Content sharing (text and images) 1280x720 3 0.13 Mbps
Table 3: Video Parameters for Common Video Stream Types
Video Quality Artifacts
The first step in troubleshooting video quality is to clearly understand the symptom experienced
by the end user. Getting a screenshot or a picture of the display screen usually gives more
information than a verbal description of the problem. The type of video artifacts observed in a
screenshot or picture can be used to determine the troubleshooting path. For example, in Figure
13, pictures (a) and (b) are artifacts that are caused when video streams experience packet loss.
Just by seeing the picture, you can immediately start troubleshooting to identify the source of the
packet loss.
Figure 13: Video Quality Artifacts
Picture (c) in Figure 13 is an example of an artifact caused when an incorrect camera driver is
installed in the end user’s device computer, which causes a strange color pixelization. Picture (d)
shows a blurry video in the primary video stream while the secondary video stream containing
the presentation content has good quality. The blurriness is visibly noticeable when you try to
read the letters on the character shown in the primary video. This scenario is typically observed
when the resolution of the primary video stream is downgraded to accommodate the secondary
video stream during low bandwidth conditions.
Factors That Influence Video Quality
There are three main factors that influence media quality:
1. Input and Output Components
2. Negotiated Media Capability
3. Network Impairments
Input and Output Components (or I/O Components) refers to the microphone, camera,
speaker, and display screen components of the device and headsets used by the end user to join a
Webex Meeting. The quality of the video generated by the source device depends on the
brightness, contrast, and saturation settings of the video camera. Fortunately, the local self-
camera view is available across most devices today and end users are adept at testing their local
video before submitting a video quality issue ticket. To ensure the best experience,
administrators should provide a recommended set of headsets, cameras, and PC requirements as
part of the user onboarding process and validate whether the operating system (OS) software
versions, and 3rd party camera driver version requirements are met. Performing these checks is
critical for troubleshooting and preventing issues like the pixelated local video as shown in
picture (c) of Figure 13. The video quality of the camera output can be improved by adjusting the
brightness, contrast, saturation, sharpness levels available in the camera settings and also by
using better lighting in the end user environment.
Webex Control Hub makes it quite easy to find the device type and operating system version
used by the end user to join a Webex meeting. All you need is the end user’s email address and
meeting time to find the right meeting and to get end user’s device details. Figure 14 shows the
list of meetings attended by a participant with the email address, rtpmsuser1@gmail.com.
Figure 14: Participant Device Details
Clicking the meeting of interest provides audio, video, and content sharing statistics along with
other information for all participants in the meeting. The Details tab displays key device level
information such as hardware type and software version of the Webex client that was used to join
the meeting. It can be inferred from Figure 14 that the user Arun joined the meeting using Cisco
Webex Desk Pro device running CE 9.14 software version.
Negotiated Media Capability refers to the audio codec, video codec, resolution, frame rates and
maximum media bitrate (bandwidth) that are negotiated and currently in use for the primary
video and secondary video (content sharing). Clicking the participant's name in the participant
list on the left side of Diagnostics page (Figure 14) provides insights into the codec used for
audio, video, and content share along with video resolution. Figure 15 shows a participant that is
using the Opus audio codec (which was discussed in more detail in the previous section “Audio
in Webex Meetings”) and the H.264 video codec configured for the BP (Baseline Profile)
capability. Additionally, this H.264 stream is currently receiving video at a resolution of 288p
(512x288), which is in fact a low video resolution value. This information about the video stream
indicates that the video may be blurry when viewed on a larger screen. It is important to note that
the frame rate and video resolution can dynamically change during the call depending on
network conditions or occurrence of events such as sharing a presentation.
NOTE: The next generation AV1 codec is slowly replacing the aging H.264 video codec in Webex. The
AV1 codec provides much better quality but is not as broadly supported by endpoints and does
currently require more computing resources for the encoding. More information can be found here -
https://blog.webex.com/engineering/the-av1-video-codec-comes-to-webex/
Figure 15: Negotiated Media Capabilities
NOTE: The device type and software version of each participant’s device are determined based
on information received from the client. Currently, the Diagnostics details tab shows the audio
and video codecs negotiated initially at meeting setup time and is not updated if the codecs get
re-negotiated during the meeting.
Network impairments such as packet loss, delay, and jitter can also impact video quality. The
video frame data is highly compressed through the encoding process to minimize bandwidth
utilization. This high compression makes video streams more sensitive to packet loss than
audio streams.Even a 1% packet loss may cause noticeable artifacts if the client does not use
advanced techniques to handle packet loss. Cisco collaboration endpoints and applications make
use of several adaptive mechanisms to preserve high video quality even during packet loss
situations. The animation in Figure 16 shows how missing I and P frames can affect video
quality.
The artifact observed by end users depends on which video frame type is missing due to packet
loss. If an IP packet containing an I-frame is lost, the receiving endpoint would not be able to
decode the video correctly even if it receives all the subsequent packets that contain the P-
frames. This scenario is highlighted in the first animation of Figure 16. This is because the video
decoder will not be able to decode the P-frames without the reference I-frame and hence need to
discard all the P-frames until the next I-frame is successfully received. End users observe frozen
video artifacts in this scenario. On the other hand, if the I-frame is received correctly but only
some of the P-frames are lost during transit, then the video decoder will continue to process the
received P-frames and the video gets rendered. Some of the motion changes captured in the
missing P-frames cannot be rendered resulting in line stripe like artifacts shown to end users as
indicated in the second animation of Figure 16.
Figure 16: Video Quality Artifacts During Packet Loss
Cisco video endpoints use several intelligent mechanisms to handle packet loss in media streams.
The first mechanism, called RTCP based dynamic bit rate adjustment, uses Real-time Control
Packet (RTCP) packets to become aware that the remote endpoint is experiencing packet loss
consistently. Then, it dynamically reduces the upstream video bit rate to minimize the possibility
of packet loss.
The second technique uses Repair-P frames. Typically, endpoints experiencing packet loss
request the remote peer to resend the I-Frame to recover from packet loss. As I-Frames are larger
in size, resending them in a lossy network scenario usually makes the situation worse. To avoid
resending I-Frames, the endpoint stores the initial I-Frame as a Long Term Reference Frame
(LTRF) and uses small Repair-P frames to resync with the peer after experiencing packet loss.
The size of a Repair-P frame is only 10% of the I-Frame and helps in faster video data recovery.
The third mechanism is Forward Error Correction (FEC), which works by sending redundant
video data within RTP packets. This enables the endpoint experiencing packet loss to
automatically recover video data without asking the other end to resend frames. In the FEC
scenario shown in Figure 17, even if the packet P2 is lost, the destination endpoint will be able to
recover it by using the data available in P1. This avoids the needs to resync with the originator
right after the packet loss.
Figure 17: Packet Loss Recovery Using Forward Error Correction
The fourth mechanism called Media Adaptation and Resilience Implementation (MARI) is a
combination of several techniques. These techniques include video packet pacing which
minimizes packet loss due to burstiness, RTP retransmission (RTX) to recover lost packets in
delay tolerant low frame rate content sharing video streams and FEC to recover multiple lost
packets in main video and high frame rate content sharing video streams to ensure high video
quality experience even in lossy networks.
Collaboration endpoints dynamically choose RTX or FEC depending on negotiated bandwidth
and delay tolerance for a given media stream. FEC results in higher bandwidth utilization due to
redundant video data but it doesn’t introduce additional delay to recover lost packets. Whereas
RTX doesn’t contribute to higher bandwidth utilization because the RTP packets are
retransmitted only when the receiver indicates packet loss in RTCP feedback channel. RTX
introduces packet recovery delay due to the time it takes for the RTCP packet to reach the
receiver from the sender and for the retransmitted packet to reach the receiver from the sender.
Reducing the bandwidth consumption for Webex meetings reduces the possibility of packet loss
due to any rate-limiting configuration within the Service provider as the Webex traffic traverses
the Internet on its way to the Webex cloud. Video Mesh Node can be deployed in enterprise
networks to optimize up-stream video bandwidth in Webex meetings, specifically when several
on-premise video endpoints join the same meeting. Figure 18 shows an example scenario in
which a virtual meeting is attended by students in class rooms using their laptops, local school
teachers using Cisco DX80 in their offices, Webex room kit from Media lab and Webex board
from Library. Without Video Mesh Node, each endpoint sends audio and video streams directly
to the Webex Cloud resulting in about 23.7 Mbps for just one Webex meeting. Whereas with
Video Mesh Node (VMN) deployment, Webex cloud instructs the endpoints to send their media
stream to the local VMN and the local VMN sends only the media streams of the last six active
speakers resulting in only 8.54 Mbps of upstream bandwidth.
Figure 18: Reduced Up-stream Bandwidth using Video Mesh Node
The audio and video RTP streams from the Webex Meetings client, Webex App, Webex Room
Device, and Webex Mesh Nodes to the Webex Cloud are sent across a single UDP connection.
UDP is the preferred transport method and hence is referred as Primary transport type. When
UDP connection is not available, for example when UDP ports are blocked by firewall, clients
use alternate transport methods such as TCP to send audio and video RTP streams. Table 4 lists
the primary and alternate transport types and port numbers used by Webex clients. The port
number 33434 is used only if the port numbers 5004, 9000 are blocked.
Webex client type Primary Alternate UDP port TCP port
transport transport numbers numbers
type type
Webex Meetings client UDP TCP 9000 80 / 443
Webex App UDP TCP 9000, 33434 5004, 33434
Webex Room Devices UDP TCP 5004, 33434 5004, 33434
Webex Mesh Node UDP TCP 5004 5004
Cisco Video Collaboration Devices UDP N/A 49152 - 59999 N/A
through Expressway-E
Table 4: Port Numbers Used by Webex Meetings Media Streams
The RTP packets that belong to the audio and video streams have separate Differentiated Service
Code Point (DSCP) values which enables the Network to provide higher preference to audio
packets than the video packets. DSCP utilizes 6 bits in the IP header field to assign values to an
IP packet so network devices, like routers, can ensure their priority.
Figure 19: Audio RTP Packet Marked with EF DSCP
Audio RTP packets are marked with Expedited Forwarding (EF, DSCP=46) and Video RTP
packets are marked with Assured Forwarding (AF41, DSCP=34) as shown in Figure 19 and 20.
Figure 20: Video RTP Packet Marked with AF41 DSCP
NOTE: Windows OS 7 and higher require applications to have administrator privileges in order to
be able to mark DSCP value of media streams. Webex app installed in Windows devices don’t have
admin privileges in most deployments and hence the DSCP value of audio and video packets
generated from such devices will be zero. To overcome this limitation, it is recommended to mark
the Webex meeting audio and video RTP streams with the correct DSCP value by using an ingress
QoS policy at the WAN edge router. The class-map defined within the QoS policy can use the
source and destination port numbers or Network Based Application Recognition (NBAR) to match
the Webex traffic. Please reference the session Webex Bandwidth Management - BRKCOL-2777 in
the Cisco Live On-Demand Library for additional design and configuration details.
He s
Since the network is providing differential treatment to Audio and Video RTP streams, it is
possible for these streams to experience different one-way network delay from the client to
Webex Cloud. Transcoding is another reason for the network delay difference between audio and
video streams. For example, when an endpoint that supports only H.263 video codec and G.711
audio codec joins a Webex meeting (Webex CMR cloud), Webex performs transcoding of H.263
→ H.264 video stream while the audio stream is processed without any transcoding. The
receiving endpoints use a technique called RTCP based media synchronization to align audio and
video streams together and play out the media in a synchronized fashion. If there is significant
network delay difference between these two streams, for example audio packets consistently
arrive earlier than the video packets during network congestion, there is a possibility of end users
experiencing lip synchronization issues. During a lip-sync issue, the lip movement of the active
speaker doesn’t align with speaker’s voice and the voice either lags or leads the lip movements.
It is harder for the meeting participants to listen, focus and participate in the conversation in such
situations.
The variance in delay between packets of the same stream is referred to as network jitter. The
receiving endpoints use a jitter buffer to store the audio and video data and media is played out in
a periodic time interval. This allows packets that arrive early to be stored in the jitter buffer and
played out in a synchronized fashion. Packets that arrive late are considered as lost packets and
are dropped resulting in video frame loss. Table 5 provides a summary of commonly observed
video-related issues and their most likely root causes.
Root cause Issue symptoms
Low packet loss Line stripes, Blocky video
High packet loss Frozen video
Network delay Lip synchronization
Low network bandwidth Blurry video, Low video resolution
Camera driver Grainy video, Video pixelization
Table 5: Common Video Quality Symptoms and Their Causes
Cisco validated design (CVD) guides are good sources of best practice recommendations that
help you select the right architecture for on-prem, hybrid and cloud collaboration deployments.
The following CVD guides provide detailed information about Quality of Service and Quality of
Experience from Collaboration applications and end users perspective:
1. Bandwidth Management chapter of Preferred Architecture for Cisco Webex Hybrid
Services, CVD.
2. Implementing Quality of Experience for Webex in Work from Home Environments.
Control Hub Audio and Video Troubleshooting Analytics
Often, users who experience audio and video quality issues may not take the time to report the
issue to their internal helpdesk. Therefore, depending solely on the user feedback isn’t sufficient
to guarantee the best experience to end users. The Webex Control Hub Analytics enables you to
be proactive by making it easier to visualize the user experience and performance of all meetings
within their organization in an intuitive way.
Figure 21 shows the first level view of meetings in a 30-day timeframe from a media quality
perspective. You are informed of the location that has the most participants with poor audio or
video quality. This functionality saves troubleshooting time by eliminating the need to manually
analyze the media statistics to isolate the source of the media quality issues. You can also
identify the percentage of the meeting participants who had good, fair, and poor meeting quality
and their geographical region and location distribution. In the example illustrated by Figure 21,
India has the most participants experiencing voice and video quality issues.
Figure 21: Meeting Quality Insights
Clicking the View all Insights provides additional granular insights, such as device types and
connection types used by participants experiencing problems. For the example scenario being
discussed, all the participants who experienced quality issues are using a Mac computer and are
connected to Webex across a Wireless connection as shown in Figure 22.
Figure 22: VoIP Quality Insights
The VoIP Quality by Participants, VoIP Quality by Connection, and VoIP Quality by
Platform graphs in Figures 23-25 provide information about when the poor media quality was
observed, the type of network connection used by the client devices (Ethernet, Wi-Fi, Cellular),
and the client device types (participant joined from web browser in a device running Windows,
MAC, Android, or iOS operating system or participant joined from the Webex application). The
Other category in Video Quality by Platform graph includes participants joining from
collaboration endpoints, such as Cisco DX 80 or Cisco Desk Pro.
Figure 23: Media Quality Level Distribution
Figure 24: Meeting Participant Connection Types
Figure 25: Meeting Participant Device Types
The Participants with Poor Quality section in the Quality insights page displays the list of
participants who had an average end-to-end packet loss greater than 5% and average network
latency greater than 400 milliseconds during the duration of one or more Webex meetings that
occurred in the specified data range (e.g. 30 days). It is important to note that end-to-end packet
loss refers to packet loss experienced by a client device after it has applied error recovery
techniques such as Forward Error Correction. Clicking the participant name link in Figure 26
will take you to the Troubleshooting section of Webex Control Hub auto-populated with the list
of meetings attended by the participant in the date range set at the top of Quality insights page.
You can reference the Troubleshooting scenarios in the next section of this document for further
steps to isolate the root cause of the poor quality problem.
Figure 26: Participant with Poor Quality
Proactive Notifications
It is useful to get proactively notified when specific users such as executives within your
organization experience media quality issues so that your team can take action to resolve the issue
right when it happens instead of working on an escalation later. You can setup Webex to notify
your helpdesk team via email or Webex app when packet loss, jitter and latency reaches a specific
threshold for a specific duration during the meeting of specific users. The alert details are defined
in Control Hub (Troubleshooting > Alerts) section. Figure 27 shows an example of an alert that
notifies helpdesk@example.com when the user ic2user1@gmail.com experiences 5% video
packet loss or more than 400ms latency for one minute (accumulation time), one or more times in
a three minute window (consecutive time). The alert is also generated when 10% audio packet loss
or more than 400ms latency is observed during the same accumulation and consecutive times.
Figure 27: Proactive Network Impairment Notification Alert Configuration
Use Cases and Troubleshooting Scenarios
Garbled Voice and Line Stripe Artifacts in Video
Problem description
You receive a report from User 1 (rtpmsuser1@gmail.com), one of the participants of a recent
meeting, stating that the audio quality was intermittently poor. The described symptoms are
audio drops, garbled audio, or choppy audio during the meeting # 1463195095 at around 2:50
PM EST on 8th Oct. 2020. The users also report that at times they see line stripe artifacts in the
video stream as shown in picture (a) of Figure 13.
Problem Analysis using Control Hub
Control Hub provides a wealth of information for every meeting that you can use to quickly
isolate whether the media quality issue is caused by user’s device, user’s network, or the Webex
cloud. The first step is to find the meeting of interest by using the Monitoring >
Troubleshooting menu in the Control Hub Navigation bar as shown in Figure 28. Selecting the
meeting leads you to a web page that shows the quality of each participant’s experience in a
graphical format. The Audio and Video tabs in this webpage provides a graphical representation
of the audio and video stream statistics from the time each participant joins the meeting.
Figure 28: Finding the Meeting of Interest
Figure 29: User 1’s Media Statistics Graph
The media statistics of the meeting participant at a specific point in time can be retrieved as
shown in Figure 29. You can quickly observe that the audio stream received by User 1 at around
2:50 PM is marked as Red (Poor) and that User 1’s endpoint is experiencing a 10% packet loss.
It is a good practice to check whether other participants experienced the same issue at the same
time. User 3, User 5 and User 6 experience similar packet loss in the Receiving direction (i.e.
from Webex to the user’s device) as shown in Figure 30. A key point to note is that the
Receiving packet loss value displayed in the graph is the end-to-end packet loss experienced
by the Webex client after forward error correction is applied.
Figure 30: Meeting Participant Media Statistics Graph
Interestingly, User 4’s statistics gives different information. The packet loss is observed in
Sending direction instead of Receiving direction. The Sending packet loss value displayed in
the graph is the hop-by-hop packet loss experienced by the Webex cloud in the RTP media
stream received from the client.
Figure 31: Meeting Participant Media Statistics Graph
Packet loss in the sending direction indicates that Webex is not getting all the audio RTP (Real
time protocol) packets from User 4’s endpoint or is getting the audio packets in a delayed fashion
so that they end up being discarded. If there is packet loss in the media stream received from the
active speaker, it impacts all the recipients. In this case, the media statistics timeline will show a
RED (Poor quality) or ORANGE (Fair quality) color for all other participants if the packet loss
can’t be recovered by the participant’s client device as shown in Figure 31. If an RTP packet is
not received in a timely manner, the endpoint tries to predict the audio content based on recent
past audio frames to conceal the missing audio gaps. This results in noticeable garbled audio
when the time duration for audio concealment is long. At this point, you have successfully
isolated the problem to one participant.
NOTE: It is important to note that even though the media statistics graph is showing Red and
Orange colors indicating network issues, it is possible for the Webex client to compensate the
packet loss and thereby resulting in no audio or video interruptions to the end user. It is always a
good practice to leverage the media statistics in the context of an issue reported by an end user.
The next step in the troubleshooting process is to identify the root cause for User 4’s audio
stream packet loss. Is it due to delayed transmission of packets at the source device, is it due to
packets getting dropped at the user’s network edge, or is it due to packets getting dropped while
traversing the Internet on the way to the Webex cloud? Clicking a participant’s name in the
media quality graph leads to the Participant Details graph which provides a consolidated view
of audio, video, content share, CPU and memory usage, and the Webex media node to which the
user’s device is connected as shown in Figure 32.
Figure 32: Participant Details
The Participant details graph of User 4 shows that System CPU (13%), Webex App CPU (4%),
System Memory (85%) and Webex App Memory (2%) utilizations are at normal usage levels.
Therefore, we can rule out the user’s device contributing to the media quality problem. Given
that the packet loss (10%) and latency (442 milliseconds) of the audio stream is high while other
system parameters are normal, we can conclude that the impairments are caused by the network
connection between end user’s device and Webex media node in Chicago.
The troubleshooting techniques used to identify the source of packet loss between User 4 and
Webex media node differs based on the type of network to which User 4 is connected. If User 4
is joining the Webex meeting from an enterprise network, we can use Performance monitor
feature in the enterprise network edge to isolate whether the packet loss is introduced within the
enterprise network or within the Internet. If the User 4 is connected to a home network, we can
use the troubleshooting best practices discussed in the “Tips to Troubleshoot Network Issues in
Home Networks” section. Fortunately, the upcoming Webex – ThousandEyes integration will
bring more visibility into the end-to-end network performance in such scenarios. This whitepaper
will be updated once this integration is generally available for customers.
Tips to Troubleshoot Network Issues in Home Networks
As a Webex administrator, you can provide the following check list to an end user experiencing
packet loss or network delays in their home network to enable them to self-solve many audio and
video quality issues.
1. Avoid VPN Connection for Webex meetings
Webex meeting service can be accessed by end users directly through the Internet. Hence
it is recommended to bypass VPN connection in order to avoid routing Webex meeting
traffic to the VPN headend and then to the Webex cloud. VPN clients can be configured
with Split Tunneling feature to identify Webex Traffic and not send the corresponding IP
packets through the VPN connection. The article titled “Optimize AnyConnect Split
Tunnel for Microsoft Office 365 and Cisco Webex” provides an example Split Tunneling
configuration for Cisco Adaptive Security Appliance (ASA) with AnyConnect VPN
clients.
2. Check the network connection of the device
Most end users connect to the home network across a Wi-Fi connection. The quality of
the network connection greatly depends on the wireless signal strength and lack of
interference. There are a number of free and inexpensive Wi-Fi network analyzers
available for desktop and mobile devices. These analyzers provide insights into WiFi
parameters, settings, and the radio signal itself. The following WiFi information is
usually included:
• Mode (802.11 a/b/g/n/ac/ax)
• Band (5Ghz, 2.4 Ghz)
• Channel
• Signal strength
• Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR)
• Vendor
Typically, the Wi-Fi network analyzer displays intuitive visual indicators to highlight
good, average, poor wireless network connection based on the SNR level. SNR values
stronger than 40 dB indicate a good wireless connection. Figure 36 shows information
collected on a per channel level using NetSpot WiFi Analyzer.
Figure 36: Wireless Connection Details
Some home routers with pre-built WiFi access points provide native WiFi congestion
testing tools and WiFi connection statistics. Figure 37 is an example screenshot collected
from such a router that uses a congestion score from 1-10 to represent the congestion
level in each WiFi channel. The “Transmit Discard Packets” indicate the number of
packets that were dropped by the device. It is a best practice to clear the connection
statistics and monitor whether the drop packet counter is incrementing, especially during
a Webex call.
Figure 37: Example of WiFi Access Point Congestion Information
To remedy a poor WiFi connection at home, end users can use WiFi extenders, change
the location of the device (i.e. move closer to the access point) to get a better signal,
switch to the 5Ghz band to minimize interference, and/or select a wireless access point
that supports faster speeds (e.g. 802.11ac).
3. Change or upgrade the network connection
Another approach is to choose a more reliable network connection. For example, the end
user can connect their device directly to an ethernet port and eliminate wireless
interferences.
Observing the time of the day in which audio and video quality issues happen also helps
to isolate the problem. Does the problem always occur when multiple users on the home
network are attending online meetings at the same time? A common scenario is kids and
parents attending school and business meetings at the same time. Irrespective of whether
you are connected to a wireless or wired port, you will experience packet loss or delay if
your home network experiences network congestion. Performing a network test right
from the cable modem will give you accurate internet upload, download speeds, and
latency. End users should ensure that their Internet service and home network can handle
the amount of traffic being placed on it during peak usage periods.
End users can upgrade their internet services to have higher upload speeds if their
bandwidth consumption exceeds their upload speed. As a last resort, end users can also
choose to use a dedicated Hotspot connection from a cellular device to bypass the local
home network.
4. Engage the Internet service provider
After ensuring that the local wired or wireless connections are good, engaging the service
provider can often be helpful. Sometimes, the problem observed by end users may be
caused by software issues in the cable or DSL modems, a poor connection between the
modem and the service provider network, or by issues within the service provider
network itself.